feat(lint): add actionlinter (#44)
sfeir-open-source/sfeir-school-github-action-dev: docs/markdown/10-syntax/01-quality.md

<!-- .slide: class="with-code-bg-dark" -->

# Quality

> How can we always maintain the quality of a GitHub Action or Workflow?

Notes:

Speaker **Thibauld**

##--##

<!-- .slide: class="with-code-bg-dark" -->

# Quality

## Lint tool

[Action lint](https://rhysd.github.io/actionlint/) is an open-source linter for GitHub Action or Workflow.

- Syntax  
- Strong type check for `${{ }}` expressions
- Actions usage check
- Reusable workflow check
- shellcheck and pyflakes
- Security checks
- and more
<!-- .element: class="list-fragment" -->

Notes:

> Speaker **Thibauld**

Reviewer: Add empty lines around it to improve the markdown syntax

<!-- .slide: class="with-code-bg-dark" -->

# Quality

> > How can we always provide quality on a Github action ?

Reviewer: Maybe use the term `maintain` instead of `provide`.
```suggestion
> How can we always maintain the quality of a GitHub Action or Workflow?
```

Notes:

> Speaker **Someone**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Speaker **Thibault**
```

##--##

<!-- .slide: class="with-code-bg-dark" -->

# Quality

## Lint tool

> [Action lint](https://rhysd.github.io/actionlint/) is a open source linter for Github Action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Action lint](https://rhysd.github.io/actionlint/) is an open-source linter for GitHub Action or Workflow.
```

- Syntax  
- Strong type check for `${{ }}` expressions
- Actions usage check
- Reusable workflow check
- shellcheck and pyflakes
- Security checks

> - ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- and more
```

<!-- .element: class="list-fragment" -->

> Notes:
> 
> - check unexpected or missing keys following workflow syntax
> - catch several semantic errors like access to not existing property, type mismatches, ...
> - check that inputs at with: and outputs in steps.{id}.outputs are correct
> - inputs/outputs/secrets of reusable workflows and workflow calls
> - shellcheck and pyflakes integrations for scripts at run:
> - script injection by untrusted inputs, hard-coded credentials
> - glob syntax validation, dependencies check for `needs:`, runner label validation, cron syntax validation, ...
> 
> Speaker **Someone**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notes:

Speaker **Thibault**

- check unexpected or missing keys following workflow syntax
- catch several semantic errors like access to a not existing property, type mismatches, ...
- check that inputs at with: and outputs in `steps.{id}.outputs` are correct
- inputs/outputs/secrets of reusable workflows and workflow calls
- shellcheck and pyflakes integrations for scripts at `run:`
- script injection by untrusted inputs, hard-coded credentials
- glob syntax validation, dependencies check for `needs:`, runner label validation, cron syntax validation, ...
```

##--##

<!-- .slide: class="with-code-bg-dark" -->

# Quality

## Lint tool - Usage 

```yaml [9-12|13-15]
name: Lint GitHub Actions workflows
on: [push, pull_request]

jobs:
  actionlint:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v3
      - name: Download actionlint
        id: get_actionlint
        run: bash <(curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rhysd/actionlint/main/scripts/download-actionlint.bash)
        shell: bash
      - name: Check workflow files
        run: ${{ steps.get_actionlint.outputs.executable }} -color
        shell: bash
```

Notes:

> Speaker **Someone**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Speaker **Thibault**
```

##--##

<!-- .slide: class="with-code-bg-dark" -->

# Quality

> ## Lint tool - Customize
> 
> - Make a commentary for each pull request
> - Change the format to markdown with `-format` option 
> - Ignore false positive with `-ignore` option 
> - Manage exit status 
> - ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Lint tool - Customize

- Make a commentary for each pull request
- Change the format to markdown with the `-format` option 
- Ignore false positives with the `-ignore` option 
- Manage exit status 
- and more
```

<!-- .element: class="list-fragment" -->

Notes:

> Speaker **Someone**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Speaker **Thibault**

```
